---
layout: category
title: Publications
sidebar_sort_order: 4
---

#### Marita Jacob, Michael Kühhirt and Margarida Rodrigues (2019). Labour Market Returns to Graduates’ International Experience: Exploring Cross-Country Variation in Europe. 
The potential benefits of increased international experience abound, ranging from enriching cultural understanding to an improvement of language skills and intercultural competence. At the same time, empirical evidence is mixed, particularly with regards to how well international experience translates into individual returns on the labour market. This article examines the association between studying abroad and early labour market outcomes in a comparative perspective aiming to shed light on why labour market returns differ across countries. We expect labour market returns to vary with specific country characteristics such as demand for international experience and competition among graduates at labour market entry. In our empirical analyses, we use data from 13 European countries that provide information on graduates’ early labour market outcomes. We find a large variation in the impact of studying abroad on both wages and attaining a higher service class position. Generally, the labour market returns to international experience are larger in countries in Eastern and Southern Europe with poorer university quality, higher graduate unemployment, and fewer students abroad.

DOI: [10.1093/esr/jcz022](https://doi.org/10.1093/esr/jcz022) | [Replication files](https://osf.io/qhzjg/)

#### Markus Klein, Katherin Barg and Michael Kühhirt (2019). Inequality of Educational Opportunity in East and West Germany: Convergence or Continued Differences?  
Diversity in education systems, and broader political and economic conditions, are commonly credited with international variation in inequality of educational opportunity (IEO). Comparing East and West Germany before reunification allows us to investigate whether vastly different political, economic, and educational systems led to differences in IEO. Postreunification, East Germany adopted the West’s systems and experienced an economic recession. IEO had been smaller in East Germany than in West Germany but was on an upward trajectory before reunification. After 1990, IEO in East Germany converged to the West German level as a result of decreased IEO in the west and increasing levels in the east. Postreunification convergence suggests that differences in political context and education policy are crucial for IEO.

DOI: [10.15195/v6.a1](https://doi.org/10.15195/v6.a1) | [Preprint](https://doi.org/10.31235/osf.io/3e9ud) | [Replication files](https://osf.io/ntgd6/) | [Blog](https://theconversation.com/what-the-fall-of-the-berlin-wall-and-german-unification-have-meant-for-educational-inequality-124331)

#### Michael Kühhirt and Markus Klein (2018). Early Maternal Employment and Children’s Vocabulary and Inductive Reasoning Ability: A Dynamic Approach.  
This study investigates the relationship between early maternal employment history and children's vocabulary and inductive reasoning ability at age 5, drawing on longitudinal information on 2,200 children from the Growing Up in Scotland data. Prior research rarely addresses dynamics in maternal employment and the methodological ramifications of time‐variant confounding. The present study proposes various measures to capture duration, timing, and stability of early maternal employment and uses inverse probability of treatment weighting to control for time‐variant confounders that may partially mediate the effect of maternal employment on cognitive scores. The findings suggest only modest differences in the above ability measures between children who have been exposed to very different patterns of eary maternal employment, but with similar observed covariate history.

DOI: [10.1111/cdev.1279](http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/cdev.12796/abstract) | [Preprint](https://osf.io/preprints/socarxiv/brscf) | [Replication files](https://osf.io/m8trg) | [Blog](https://theconversation.com/being-a-working-mother-is-not-bad-for-your-children-78439)

#### Thomas Biegert and Michael Kühhirt (2018). Taking Lemons for a Trial Run: Does Type of Job Exit Affect the Risk of Entering Fixed-Term Employment in Germany?  
A central argument for the deregulation of employment contracts is that fixed-term contracts boost employment of jobseekers with uncertain productivity by giving employers a tool to screen such applicants over a longer period of time before permanent hire. We test this proposition by comparing the risk of entering fixed-term employment for individually laid-off workers with that for individuals who have left their previous job for other reasons. This strategy is based on the assumption that in the German context individual lay-offs create uncertainty about jobseekers’ productivity. We use data on work exits and subsequent labour market re-entry of the prime-age workforce in Germany from waves 2000–2013 of the Socio-Economic Panel. Our results show that the risk of fixed-term employment is substantively smaller after voluntary job exits but reveal only a small and statistically insignificant risk difference between individual lay-offs and workplace closures after adjusting for differences in socio-economic background and characteristics of the previous job. These findings challenge the view that employers use fixed-term contracts as an instrument to screen specific groups of workers whose productivity is highly uncertain, at least with regard to recent career disruptions.

DOI: [10.1093/esr/jcy003](https://doi.org/10.1093/esr/jcy003) | [Preprint](https://osf.io/preprints/socarxiv/zuwat/) | [Replication files](https://osf.io/nh5u4)

#### Marita Jacob, Corinna Kleinert and Michael Kühhirt (2013). Trends in Gender Disparities at the Transition from School to Work: Labour Market Entries of Young Men and Women between 1984 and 2005 in West Germany.  
This paper examines trends in school-to-work transitions of young men and women with lower and higher secondary education in West Germany between 1984 and 2005. This period was marked by an increase in young women’s educational attainment and a continuous growth of the service sector. We assume that both developments have benefited women more than men in terms of smooth labour market integration. Results from discrete event history analyses show that in recent years women indeed found their first job faster than men. However, this is not mainly due to an improvement in young women’s chances to enter employment, but to deteriorating employment prospects of men, in particular of unskilled men.

DOI: [10.1080/13636820.2012.738427](https://doi.org/10.1080/13636820.2012.738427) | [Preprint](http://www.mzes.uni-mannheim.de/publications/wp/wp-127.pdf)

#### Michael Kühhirt (2012). Childbirth and the Long-Term Division of Labour within Couples: How do Substitution, Bargaining Power, and Norms affect Parents' Time Allocation in West Germany?  
Parents display a highly gendered division of labour: fathers specialize in paid work and mothers take over most domestic work. However, the processes underlying the long-term effect of parenthood on a couple’s time allocation remain obscure, because previous research merely looks at the average effect of having children, neglecting possible interactions with the partners’ absolute and relative resources. More specifically, affluent couples might be able to mitigate the impact of parenthood on time allocation by substituting their domestic work with services purchased in the market. Further, in couples with a female breadwinner prior to parenthood, men might take over the majority of household tasks after children are born. This study tests these hypotheses with data from the German Socio-Economic Panel using fixed-effects regression. The analysis shows that parenthood leads to a long-term increase in women’s housework and childcare time and a pronounced decline in market hours regardless of household income and pre-birth resource constellation. Men’s time use is hardly affected by the birth of children even if they were financially dependent on their partner. These results suggest norms as the main driving force behind long-term dynamics in couples’ time allocation across the transition to parenthood. The article concludes that future research needs to address the interplay of economic and normative factors in shaping time allocation in greater detail, both empirically and theoretically.

DOI: [10.1093/esr/jcr026](https://doi.org/10.1093/esr/jcr026) |

#### Michael Kühhirt and Volker Ludwig (2012). Domestic Work and the Wage Penalty for Motherhood in West Germany.  
Previous research suggests that household tasks prohibit women from unfolding their full earning potential by depleting their work effort and limiting their time flexibility. The present study investigated whether this relationship can explain the wage gap between mothers and nonmothers in West Germany. The empirical analysis applied fixed‐effects models and used self‐reported information on time use and earnings as well as monthly family and work histories from the German Socio‐Economic Panel (1985–2007, N = 1,810; Wagner, Frick, & Schupp, 2007). The findings revealed that variation in reported time spent on child care and housework on a typical weekday explains part of the motherhood wage penalty, in particular for mothers of very young children. Furthermore, housework time incurred a significant wage penalty, but only for mothers. The authors concluded that policies designed to lighten women's domestic workload may aid mothers in following rewarding careers.

DOI:  [10.1111/j.1741-3737.2011.00886.x](http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1741-3737.2011.00886.x/abstract) |

#### Markus Klein and Michael Kühhirt (2010). Social Desirability and Response Bias in Case of the Division of Household Labour: The Interaction between Gender of the Interviewer and Respondent Characteristics in Telephone Interviews.  
In this paper the authors examine the impact of the interviewer's gender on respondents' self-reported share of housework in telephone interviews. Due to a discrepancy between modern, egalitarian gender roles dominating public discussion and men's marginal participation in housework they expect male respondents to answer in a socially desirable way and exaggerate their share of housework vis à vis female interviewers. At the same time, they assume that female respondents underreport their contribution to the couple's housework to female interviewers. The effects of the interviewer's gender should be less strong in case of female respondents than in case of male respondents, though. Additionally, theory suggests that young and educated respondents are particularly susceptible to effects of the interviewer's gender as they are most aware of egalitarian gender roles due to their socialization and environment. For male respondents the results are largely consistent with the expectations. However, the effect of the interviewer's gender varies stronger by age than by education. Regarding female respondents the results do not indicate any significant effects across age groups and educational degrees. Overall, the results show that social desirability may also bias self-reports of everyday behaviour. Moreover, interviewer effects vary considerably between different social groups.

PID: [urn:nbn:de:0168-ssoar-210124](http://nbn-resolving.de/urn:nbn:de:0168-ssoar-210124) |
